---
layout: blog
title: GitHub Development
summary: A small post about how my team has begun to centralize exclusively around GitHub.
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p. 4 Jan 2010 - Kyoto, Japan

Recently my team and I have begun using a paid version of GitHub to host our private development repository.  Prior to that we had DropBox setup, which synced our repo between the myriad of machines we all use.  There were a couple times when the whole repo imploded for reasons unknown to us (we are guessing a machine which was offline a long time updated incorrectly), so we made the switch to GitHub without a single bit of hesitation after the last little mishap.  I had been using GitHub for all of my public projects up to that point, so I felt that we would be comfortable using the service.  Our _Man With Deep Pockets_ then funded our private repo space for us, and we haven't looked back since.  It truly is a great service to use.

Today I streamlined our whole development process just a little bit further.  Up until this point my associates and I have been using a Google Document as our Design Document / Development Information / Environment Setup / etc. go to page, which has worked quite well for the time being, but has gotten slightly unwieldy as it grew with time.  I spent an hour today migrating our document over to GitHub's wiki that was attached to our project, and it is by _far_ much more readable and easy to navigate around, as well as making simple edits to.

Finally, we really weren't using much in the way of an issue tracker.  Up until today it has mostly been "Hey I am working on X, you focus on Y", with me keeping a mental inventory of everything we are trying to get around to.  Unfortunately this doesn't work well, because everyone keeps joking about how old I am (30 isn't old!) which makes my brain segfault and lose data, and on a more serious note it's just plain hard to keep a huge list of everything that we're trying to achieve in the ol' noggin.  So I spent another hour keying into the GitHub attached issue tracker everything that was in our document which is currently uncreated, unfinished, or incomplete, and am quite satisfied in being able to go through the whole thing sorting by tags.

In conclusion, GitHub is a fantastic service, and offers everything a small development team could need all within their fingertips.  I will continue to use them as long as they remain available, which from the looks of it will be quite a long time.